[access-control] Add access control docs (#28)
TempleEight/temple-docs: TempleEight/docs/guide/access-control.md

---

In this guide we'll look at how to add access control to your services.
First we'll cover the `#readable` and `#writable` metadata tags, then we'll look at their behaviour in projects with and without authentication configured.
Finally we'll mention the limitations of this access control support.
It's highly recommended you check out the [Authentication](authentication) guide before following this guide.

## Metadata Tags
We have two metadata tags for access control, `#readable` and `#writable`.
These tags manage access for different endpoints:

|          | `#readable` | `#writable` |
|:--------:|:-----------:|:-----------:|
|  `READ`  |      x      |             |
| `UPDATE` |             |      x      |
| `DELETE` |             |      x      |
|  `LIST`  |      x      |             |

The `LIST` endpoint is not generated by default, to find out how to add it, check out the [Enumeration](enumeration) guide.

These tags can be set to either `(by: this)` or `(by: all)`.
For example, taking the `ExampleService` from the [Getting Started](../getting-started) guide, we would write:

```
ExampleService: service {
  foo: string;
  bar: int;
  #readable(by all);
}
```

> But what do `by: this` and `by: all` mean? Let us consider a project with authentication.

Author: I think it helps the doc flow but I see what you mean

## Projects with Authentication
Here we've taken the `ExampleProject` from the [Authentication](authentication) guide.

```templefile
ExampleProject: project {
  #language(go);
  #database(postgres);
  #provider(dockerCompose);
  #authMethod(email);
}

ExampleUser: service {
  name: string;
  #auth;
}

ExampleService: service {
  foo: string;
  bar: int;
}
```

Since the project has authentication, every service actually has implicit default access control tags defined:

```templefile
ExampleUser: service {
  name: string;
  #auth;
  // implicit #readable(by: this);
  // implicit #writable(by: this);
}

ExampleService: service {
  foo: string;
  bar: int;
  // implicit #readable(by: this);
  // implicit #writable(by: this);
}
```

The `by: this` means that only the authenticated user that created an object in a service can be the one to read (make `READ` or `LIST` requests) the object or write (make `UPDATE` or `DELETE` requests) to the object.

For example, if User A logs in and makes a `CREATE` request to the `ExampleService` service, the resulting object created can only be read or written by User A.

> If User B logs in and tries to make an `UPDATE` request to User A's object, User B will receive a `401 Unauthorized` error.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If User B tries to make an `UPDATE` request to User A's object using their own access token, User B will receive a `401 Unauthorized` error.
```

title: Access Control
sidebar_label: Access Control
---

In this guide we'll look at how to add access control to your services.
Access control provides a means to restrict which entities can be accessed by different users, protecting sensitive information.
First we'll cover the `#readable` and `#writable` metadata tags, then we'll look at their behaviour in projects with and without authentication configured.
Finally we'll mention the limitations of this access control support.
It's highly recommended you check out the [Authentication](authentication) guide before following this guide.

## Metadata Tags
We have two metadata tags for access control, `#readable` and `#writable`.

> These tags define how specific users can access existing entities for different endpoints:

Reviewer 2: Worth mentioning `CREATE` for structs?

  bar: int;
  #readable(by: all);
  #writable(by: this);
}
```

This means that any authenticated user can `READ` or `LIST` (if defined) a created `ExampleService` entity, but only the user that created the entity may `UPDATE` or `DELETE` it.

### Defaults
For projects with authentication, `#readable` and `#writable` behaviour defaults to `by: this` for security, forcing `by: all` to specified if desired.
This reduces the likelihood of entities being exposed to users that should not have access.

## Projects without Authentication
For projects without authentication it doesn't really make sense to have access control, since users cannot be identified.
Therefore all services have `#readable(by: all)` and `#writable(by: all)` implicitly defined on them:

```templefile
ExampleProject: project {
  #language(go);
  #database(postgres);
  #provider(dockerCompose);
}

ExampleService: service {
  foo: string;
  bar: int;
  // implicit #readable(by: all);
  // implicit #writable(by: all);
}
```

## Limitations
We acknowledge that this current implementation is limited in the granularity of access control it can support.
Access roles is top of the list of features we wish to support next.

> In the meantime, for projects with auth, the authentication token of a request is exposed to the hooks, so you can add your own access control there.

Reviewer 2: Hooks can only restrict access, not widen access compared to what is specified here.

Author: I don't think what's written here says that, but I can see how it could be misunderstood. I'll clear it up
